# Unit Testing

Unit testing test the smallest "units" of functionality, which in traditional object-oriented programming usually means methods, functions or objects. It's the ultimate white-box testing, in order to properly write unit tests, you'll need to understand the implementation of the system at a very deep level. Unit testing is usually done by the developer writing the code. They allow you to check that the methods you write do exactly what you intend them to do. The developer is intimately familiar with the codebase and should know what data needs to be passed in, which edge cases and corner cases exist, what the boundary values are etc.

## Reasons to write unit tests

- **Problems are found earlier** - Unit tests are normally written along with the code itself. There's no need to wait for (usually longer-running) systems to tests to run, for manual test to be developed or for a build to get into the hands of the testers. The developer finds problems while still developing.

- **Faster turnaround time** - If a problem is found, there's no need for a build to occur, or to get into tester's hands. The developer finds a problem when executing the unit test suite and can immediately go back and start fixing it. If the developer has to wait for a tester to look at the software, file a defect and get assigned that defect, it may be quite a while before the developer actually fixes it.

- **Faster runtime than system-level tests** - A well-designed unit test will have few to no dependencies on other libraries, classes, files. This means that they can be extremely fast, with many tests taking a few milliseconds or less to execute. By focusing on very specific parts of the code, that part of the code can be tested numerous times without the extra setup and execution time caused by other aspects of the system.

- **Developers understand their code** - Writing tests allows developers to understand what the expected behavior of the function is. It also allows the developer to add tests for things that he or she knows might be problematic for a specific function.

- **Living documentation** - The tests provide a kind of "living documentation" to the code. They explain what a codebase is supposed to do in a different way than the actual code and any comments or documentation for the software. Failing tests are updated, they are either removed or changed as the software itself changes. Unlike traditional documentation, if unit tests are executed in a regular basis, then it's impossible for the tests to become obsolete. Obsolete tests generally do not pass, and this is a giant indicator to get them fixed.

- **Alternative implementation** - One way to think of tests is as a different implementation of the software. In a sense, a program is just a listing of what a computer should do given a certain input. A comprehensive test suite provides a similar service, saying what the program should do in a slightly different way.

- **Able to tell if code changes caused issues elsewhere**- Programs nowadays can be rather large and complicated, and it’s not always easy—or even humanly possible—to know whether a change you’re making will have unintended consequences elsewhere. By having a relatively complete test suite, the developer can check easily if he or she is breaking anything obvious elsewhere in the codebase. It’s not foolproof, but it certainly makes it easier to avoid problems.

In general, you want to check for a specific _expected behavior_, if at all possible, not that it's _not unexpected_ behavior. Checking that something does not exist could be an indication that the test is fragile or not thought through. Think very carefully about failure cases when testing for the absence of a particular behavior.

## Ensuring that Tests are Testing What You Expect.

One of the simplest ways to do this is to first ensure that your tests fail! You also need to ensure that you understand what the method is supposed to do, or you may be testing for behavior that is expected by you but it is not expected by the user (or the requirements of the software)

You want your test to fail at first, so you know that when it passes you have actually fixed the issue which you are testing. There's still no guarantee that your changes fixed it - after all, your assertion itself may be incorrect!

## Problems with Unit Testing

Any behavior aside from returning a value is called a side effect. Displaying a window, printing some text, connecting to another computer over the network - all of these are, from a terminological perspective, side effects of computation. Even setting a variable or writing data to disk are side effects. Functions and methods without side effects that only receive input from parameters are called pure. Pure functions will always return the same result given the same input values and may be called an infinite number of times without modifying any other aspects of the system. Functions and methods that have side effects or that may present different results based on something other than values passed in as parameters are impure.

Pure functions are usually easier to test, because passing in the same values will always return the same value, and it’s easy to test for input and output with standard unit test procedures. Impure functions are more difficult, since you may not have a return value to assert against. Additionally, they may depend upon or modify parts of the code outside of this particular method.

Keeping as many functions pure as possible and limiting impure functions to certain areas, you will make testing the system much easier.

## Test Doubles

A unit test should be a localized test; that is, it should check the particular method or function under test, and not worry about other aspects of the system. If there is a test failure, we want to make sure that the failure is due to the code in that particular method, not something else which that method relies upon. Software is often interconnected and a particular method which relies upon other methods or classes may not work correctly if those other units of code do not work correctly.

**Test doubles** are "fake" objects which you can use in your tests to "stand in" for other objects in the codebase. This has numerous benefits aside from hiding pieces of the codebase that don't work. Tests doubles allow you to localize the sources of errors.

Whenever you use doubles, however, you are dependent upon your assumptions of how the code you depend upon is supposed to work in the actual program. There is nothing stopping you from say, creating test doubles that have a method that the actual class does not implement. In this case, your test will work fine but the actual program will not.

Doubles can also be used to speed up the execution of tests.

You should never, ever, ever use a double for the current class under test! If you do this, you're no longer testing anything, really, as you are creating a fake object for the actual thing you are testing.

Test doubles should be used as often as possible when the code that you are unit testing uses a different class than the class under test. Sometimes it will be difficult to do. In order to minimize issues, you should pass in the object as a parameter whenever possible, as opposed to relying on member variables or global variables. Even worse, and more common, are methods that generate and use objects entirely internally. It is often not possible to use test doubles for these methods. Example

```java

public class Dog
{
    DogFood _df = null;
    DogDish _dd = null;
    DogWater _dw = null;

    public void setUpDogStuff()
    {

        _dd = new DogDish();
        _df = new DogFood();
        _dw = new DogWater();
    }

    public int eatDinner()
    {
        _df.eat();
        return 1;
    }
}

```

If we were to write a test for this class, we have no way of making doubles for the objects internal to the class! Even if we then refactored `setUpDogStuff()` to accept `DogDish`,`DogFood` and `DogWater` parameters, we would be forced to work with additional items when all we care about is `DogFood`.

We can refactor the method to make it somewhat more amenable to test doubles

```java
public class Dog
{
    DogFood _df = null;
    DogDish _dd = null;
    DogWater _dw = null;
    public void setDogFood(DogFood df)
    {
        df = _df;
    }
    public void setDogDish(DogDish dd)
    {
        dd = _dd;
    }
    public void setDogWater(DogWater dw)
    {
        dw = _dw;
    }

    public int eatDinner()
    {
        _df.eat();
        return 1;
    }
}


```

## Stubs

If doubles are fake objects, stubs are fake methods. In the above examples, we didn't care what calling `.eat()` on the `DogFood` object did; we just didn't want it to call an actual DogFood object. In many cases, though, we expect a certain value when a method is called.

```java

public class Dog
{
     public int eatDinner(DogFood df)
    {
        int tastiness = df.eatDinner();
        return tastiness;
    }
}


```

If we were just using `df` as a normal test double, then there is no telling what `df.eat()` will return. Specifically, the answer varies by test framework - some will always return a default value, some will call out the real object, some will throw an exception. You shouldn't call methods on a double object unless you have stubbed them. The whole reason for making a test double is so that you have an object that you have specified, instead of relying on external definitions.

We can specify that whenever the `.eat()` method is called on our doubled object, then just return a value of 13. We have made a **stub** of the method.

```java

public class DogTest
 {
    @Test
    public void testEatDinner()
    {
        Dog d = new Dog();
        DogFood mockedDogFood = Mockito.mock(DogFood.class);
        when(mockedDogFood.eat()).thenReturn(13);
        int returnVal = d.eatDinner(mockedDogFood);
        assertEquals(13, returnVal);
    }

}


```

Now when the `mockedDogFood` object has its `.eat()` method called, it will return the value 13. Once again, we have quarantined the other methods by re-creating fakes of them that act as we think they should. In some languages, we can even stub methods that don't exist. This allows us to not only test classes that have errors, but even ones that don't have all their methods written yet.

## Mocks and Verification

We are still dependent on asserting on a value that is returned from a method, and thus won't be able to test methods without a return value!
E.g an impure method as the one shown below:

```java
public void goToCatCafe(CatCafe catCafe)
{
    System.out.println("Petting cats at a Cat Café!");
    catCafe.haveFun();
}
```

There is no return value and thus nothing on which to assert. The only way to test this method is to ensure that the `.haveFun()` method in the `catCafe` object was called. We can do this using a special kind of test double called a **mock**. A mock object will allow you to assert that a particular method was called on the mocked object. In the above instance, instead of asserting that a particular value is returned(since no value is ever returned), you instead can make a "meta-assertion" that `.haveFun()` is called. Note that this kind of verification has nothing to do with the kind of verification that means "checking that the software is right".

```java

public void testHaveFunAtDuckPond()
{
    Person p = new Person();
    DuckPond dp = Mockito.mock(DuckPond.class);
    p.haveFunAtDuckPond(dp);
    verify(dp.haveFun(), times(1));
}


```

Note, in this case, that there is no traditional assertion. The testcase ends with the execution steps, viz., calling `.haveFunAtDuckPond()`. The assertion is actually set when you verify that `.haveFun()` will be called one time on the mocked `DuckPond` object.

## Fakes

Sometimes, you need to want to have a test which depends on an object, and will require complex or non-performant behavior. In this case, you can use a **fake**. A fake is a special kind of test double which acts similarly to the regular object. However, it is written to be a part of the test, meaning that it runs faster and simpler. For example, you may remove any parts of the code which write to disk (always a slowdown when writing tests). You may have it perform a simpler calculation that a very time-consuming one. You may reduce the object's dependencies on other objects.

Fakes require more work to create than a simple test double, since they are a "lite" version of an object instead of simple specifying its external behavior. However, this allows you to perform more intricate tests than the relatively simple ones possible with test doubles.

Example:

```java

public class DuckPond extends Pond
{
    private int _funLevel = 0;
    public void haveFun()
    {
         _funLevel++;
    }
    public void haveUltraFun()
    {
    int funMultiplier = super.retrieveUltraLevelFromDatabase();
     _funLevel += funMultiplier * _funLevel;
    }
    public int getFunLevel() {
         return _funLevel;
    }
}

```

In this case, calling `haveUltraFun()` requires querying the database, which is called from a method from `DuckPond`'s superclass. However, this also modifies the `_funLevel` variable, bases on the value it received from the `UltraLevelFromDatabase()` call. The value of the variable `_funLevel` is going to depend both on the call to the database as well as how many times `haveFun()` and `haveUltraFun()` have been called. While it would be possible to just make a test double that returns specific values, adding in this behavior for a test which called multiple methods on `DuckPond` object might add up to lots of extra work. Even worse, this work might have to be replicated in multiple tests.

Using `DuckPond` as-is also means that every call to `haveUltraFun()` will result in a dramatic slowdown in tests. Remember that calls to the disk or network, since they take an order of magnitude or longer in time than the test would take otherwise, are discouraged in unit testing.

To get around this performance issue, let's create a fake version of the object, which we can use in our tests later. This fake version will be a "stripped-down" version of DuckPond, but will keep the general behavior.

```java
public class FakeDuckPond extends Pond {
private int _funLevel = 0;

public void haveFun() {
    _funLevel++;
}
public void haveUltraFun() { // REMOVED DATABASE CALL
     _funLevel += 5 * _funLevel;
      }
public int getFunLevel() {
    return _funLevel;
} }



```

We are now assuming that the `funMultiplier` variable retrieved from the database will always be 5. This will both speed up tests (by removing the database read) and simplify calculations (as well as help us understand what the expected behavior should be.) However, unlike with a traditional test double or mock, we don't have to specify what the behavior should be externally. The class itself will determine the (simplified) behavior.

## Setup and Teardown

Oftentimes, there are particular things that you want the tests for a particular class to do before each of the tests start, and after each of the tests end. For example, you may set up a mocked database connection, and want to use it as a precondition for all of the tests, instead of repeating the same line of code to create it in each individual test case.

Note that @Before and @After methods are called before _each_ test case, not one time before all of them and one time after all of them

## Testing Private Methods

There's quite an argument on whether or not it makes sense to test private methods.

### Against

- any calls from the rest of the program will have to come in through the public methods of the class. Those public methods will themselves access private methods. By testing only the public interfaces of classes, you're minimizing the number of tests that you have and focusing on the tests and code that matter.
- Another reason for not testing private methods is that inhibits you from refactoring the code later. If you have already written tests for private methods, it is going to be more work to make changes to anything "behind the scenes".

### For

- Private methods are still code, even if they're not called directly from outside the class. Unit testing is supposed to test functionality at the lowest levels possible, which is usually the method or function call.

If your goal is to test the software and test it well, you'll probably have to test the occasional private method.

## Unit Test Structure

Unit tests in most frameworks are usually grouped initially by class and further by method; they mirror the structure of the program. Since unit tests are white-box tests which interact closely with the code, this makes finding errors in the codebase based upon the particular test case much easier than with integration or manual tests.

### What to Test?

Exactly what you test will vary based upon the domain of software you are testing and the amount of time you have for testing, as well as organizational standards and other external factors.

Ideally,

- you should look at the method and think of the various success and failure cases, determine the equivalence classes, and think about what some good boundary and interior values might be to test from those equivalence classes.
- You want to also focus on testing common use cases over use cases which rarely occur, at least at first. If you are writing more safety-critical software, often it makes sense to focus on testing for failure before checking the happy path.
- Work on a base case first, and then think of possible failure cases after that.

You don't want to create a test suite that takes so long to run that people don't run it often, but a well-designed unit test suite with appropriate doubles, mocks and stubs should run very fast even when there are many tests.

### Assert Less, Name Directly

When unit tests fail, they should point you exactly what went wrong and where. They should not be large "one size fits all" tests. It is so fast to run a properly-written unit tests that the extra execution time and work involved in writing more tests is absolutely dwarfed by the amount of time that you will save when unit tests tell you exactly what went wrong when it failed. A unit test with lots of assertions shows a lack of thought towards what exactly the unit test was supposed to check for.

If the name of the test case failing does not let you know what the failure is and preferably give you a very good pointer to where the failure lies, you are probably testing too much in each individual test case.

### Unit Tests Should Be Independent

Unit tests should not de dependent on run order. That is, Test 2 should not depend on any side effects or result from Test 1. Most unit testing frameworks, will not run individual tests cases in a predetermined order. By avoiding dependencies on each other and allowing each test to run independently, failures are localized to a particular test.

There is yet another benefit to creating tests which have no dependencies on other tests. Independent tests can be run in parallel, possibly decreasing execution time dramatically. On a modern multicore machine, you may find yourself running tests many times more quickly if they can be run independently.

### Try to Make Tests Better Every Time You Touch Them

Oftentimes, you will need to work with legacy code, including code which was poorly written or does not have good test coverage. Although it may be tempting to simply continue working in the same manner that the code was originally written, you should try to do what you can to make the testing of the code better.

Keep your code easily testable, and if necessary, build wrappers around code that is difficult to test.

## Code Coverage

Code coverage tells you how much of the codebase is actually executed when running the test suite code. Since defining exactly what is meant by "how much of the codebase" can be complex, there are numerous kinds of code coverage. The simplest form of code coverage is method coverage; this measures what percentage of methods have any tests that call into them.

A more detailed form of code coverage is statement coverage. This measures what percentage of programming statements were actually executed by at least one test. A programming statement is the smallest “chunk” of code that still makes sense as an individual unit of code;
