# Test Driven Development

Test-Driven Development (TDD) is one methodology for writing quality software with a well-thought out testing suite. By following the tenets if TDD, developers will know what to test, in what order, and a way of balancing unit testing and coding application under test.

## What is TDD

Test-Driven Development is a software development methodology that comprises several key points:

1. _Writing tests first, before code_ : Before you even start thinking of how to do something, this forces you to think of what is to be done. Since your code has not been written, you can check that the test initially fails (in order to avoid tautological tests which always pass) and have a specific goal that you are reaching toward (getting the test you just wrote to pass)
2. _Writing code that makes the test pass_ : This ensures you focus on writing relevant code, instead of spending time working on possibly superfluous frameworking or other code. One of the key benefits of TDD is that it allows you to focus, by training you o keep your eye on the one goal of the cycle instead of thinking of all the other possible bits of code that you could be writing.
3. _Writing only tests that test the code_ : It's tempting to write tests for the sake of writing them; this will help to keep tests only being written for the functionality being written.
4. _A short turnaround cycle_ : TDD emphasizes quick cycles, which work to keep the developer on track and focused on a short, specific goal.
5. _Refactoring early and often_ :Refactoring is often held off until later in the development process, when it is much more difficult to do, especially if there has not been much time spent on doing it earlier. That becomes all the more reason not to do it later. By refactoring often, it becomes a part of the development process and a habit, instead of something that will be done "if there's enough time"

## The Red-Green-Refactor Loop

We work within these constraints by using the "red-green-refactor" loop. A single cycle in TDD involves the following three steps:

1. **Red**: TDD is a form of test-first development (TFD), so the first thing to do is write a test.The developer writes a failing test for a new piece of functionality or an edge case that should be checked. The newly written test - and only that test - should fail. fail. If the newly written test does not fail, that means that the code has already been written for that functionality. If other tests fail, this means that there is a problem with the test suite—perhaps an intermittent or non-deterministic failure of a test—that should be fixed before moving on. This phase is called “red” because many unit testing frameworks will display failing tests in red.
2. **Green**: The developer now writes code to make this test pass. This work will focus only on making this test pass, while not causing any other tests to fail. At this point, some "ugly" code is to be expected; the focus is on making it work as opposed to making it pretty. If other tests fail, then the developer has inadvertently caused a regression and should work on fixing that. At the end of this phase, all tests should be passing ("green").
3. **Refactor**: Once all the tests pass, the developer should examine the code that was just written and refactor it.

After each red-green-refactor cycle, the developer should think of the next piece of functionality to add and then loop back. This cycling will continue until the software is done. This is a path of testing, coding and refactoring that will eventually culminate in a complete product. As a side effect, it will also include a solid test suite that is directly relevant to all the functionality of the program.

In Summary:

1. Write a test for functionality which has not been written yet.
2. Run test suite—only the newly written test should fail. If not, first figure out why other tests are failing and fix that problem.
3. Write enough code to make that test pass, without causing other tests to fail
4. Run test suite—if any test fails, go back to step 3. If all tests pass, continue.
5. Refactor code that you have written, and/or any associated code.
6. Run test suite—if any tests fail, go back to step 5. If all tests pass, continue.
7. If there is any more functionality to add, go to step 1. If there is no more functionality to add, the application is complete!

## Principles of Test-Driven Development

There are several principles to keep in mind when writing in a TDD manner.

### YAGNI(You Ain't Gonna Need It)

Don't write any code that you don't need to in order to make the tests pass! It's always tempting to make a nice abstract system which can handle all sorts of different future variations on whatever it is you're doing now, but you will also make the code more complex.What’s worse, you will be making it more complex in ways that may not ever help the system’s future development. Avoid complexity until it’s absolutely necessary. If there are more edge cases or equivalence classes that need to be dealt with, add more tests first.

### KISS (Keep It Simple, Stupid)

One of the goals of TDD is to ensure that the code is flexible and extensible, and one of the greatest enemies of those two goals is complexity. Complex systems are difficult to understand and thus modify; complex systems tend to be overfit to the specific problem they were developed for, and it's difficult to add new features or functionality. Keep your code simple and your design simple, and consciously avoid additional complexity.

### Fake It Til You Make It

It's okay to use fake methods and objects in your tests, or just use a placeholder such as return 0; as the entire body of a method. You can come back later with additional tests and code once they are necessary.

### Avoid Slow Running Tests

If you are working with TDD, you are running at least three full test runs each iteration through the red-green-refactor loop. That’s a minimum and assuming that your code never causes problems in other tests or has any defects of its own. If running your test suite takes two or three seconds, this is a minor price to pay for the extra quality that TDD provides; if it takes several hours, how long before developers are going to start ignoring the process in order to actually get some work done?

### Remember That These Are Principles, Not Laws

It would be counterproductive to entirely ignore what else the software needs to do in the next few iterations of the red-green-refactor loop. Occasionally, a test may be slow but necessary, or adding a fake version of a method would be just as simple as actually making the method.

## Benefits of TDD

- One of the biggest benefits of TDD is that it automatically creates a test suite during development. Instead of having to worry about fitting in time to develop a testing framework and writing tests, the mere act of development will create one fore you. Testing is, sadly, often relegated to the end of the project (which means that it will be given short shrift or even avoided entirely). Using TDD ensures that you will at least have some sort of test suite even if other testing is curtailed.
- When tests are part of the workflow, people remember to do them. You're more likely to write tests when it's something that you just do all the time and have created a habit around doing. Since more tests are correlated with higher quality code, this is definitely a good thing! When things are done more often, they are also easier to do. Any problems with the tests suite will be found quickly and parts which are problematic and code which is difficult to test will be dealt with sooner.
- Yet another benefit is that the tests that you write with TDD are relevant, since new tests must fail first (ensuring that the test is not redundant) and must pass before the cycle of writing a piece of code is considered "complete". You are less likely in this case to write tests which are unnecessary or tautological, or over-test one area and undertest another.
- If you are writing tests after the fact, it's easy to fall into the trap of assuming that what the program does is what the program should do. However, remember the tests are supposed to check expected behavior against the observed behavior. If you are "expecting" something that you already "observed", your tests run the risk of being tautological.
- TDD forces you to work in small steps. This helps to ensure that you don't go too far off the path working on something. If you wrote four lines of code and introduced a defect, it's much easier to find out where you went wrong than if you find the defect after writing a thousand lines of code.
- When you are testing code from the beginning, the code is much more likely to be testable. Not only will you learn how to test code in this particular application because you are doing it all the time, you are not likely to write code that you can't test.
- Using TDD provides 100% test coverage, or atleast close to it
- Developing software using TDD can give you confidence in your codebase.

## Drawbacks of TDD
- Developing in TDD means wiring many unit tests. This focus may drive out other kinds of tests, such as performance testing and systems testing.
- In the short run, writing tests will mean more time spent to get the same amount of features.
- Traditionally, TDD provides less time up-front for architecture decisions. Due to the short cycle time of the red-green-refactor loop, less time may be spent on design and architecture as opposed to writing code which implements user stories.
