# Writing testable code

By writing the code in a testable way, not only will you make it easier to write tests now, but there are a host of other benefits. You will tend to write good, modular code.

By **testable code**, we mean code that is easy to test in an automated fashion at multiple levels of abstraction.

## Basic Strategies for Testable Code


The two key concepts to keep in mind when writing code that is testable at the unit test level are:
- Ensure code is segmented
- Ensure that events are repeatable

If a particular method relies on only a few other parts(classes, methods, external programs etc) of the system to work - and ideally, if its results are affected only by the values passed in as parameters - then it will be relatively easy to test. However, if it relies on a variety of other parts, then it can get very difficult, very quickly. You not only have to make sure that the part of the system is working, but any parts that it is dependent upon. You may be able to provide test doubles, but if the code is not written with them in mind, it may not be possible.

Keep your code DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)

### Dependency Injection

As we've seen, having dependencies hard-coded into your methods can make them difficult to test. Dependency injection means passing the dependencies in as parameters to a method, as opposed to having hard-coded references to them. This will make it much easier to pass in test doubles or mocks. Dependency injection will allow you to test your methods much more easily than having dependencies automatically created.

### TUFs and TUCs

TUFs are **test-unfriendly features**, whereas TUCs are **test-unfriendly constructs**. TUFs are software features that are by their nature difficult to test. For example, writing to a database requires either some well-though-out test doubles or dependence on many external factors. TUCs are constructs in code where testing is by nature difficult.