# Breaking Software

The reason one tests is to find defects; in order to find defects, you may have to venture a bit from the happy path, where everybody enters data in the formal you like, systems have infinite memory and CPU and your zero-latency networks are always connected.

You will have to think of ways to test for the operation of a system when things aren't quite perfect. You to think of how to cause failures and find cracks in the software under test.

## Errors to Look For

### 1. Logic Errors

A logic error is an error in the logic of the program. The developer understood what needed to be done, but in the process of converting the system from its description to its implementation, something went wrong.

In order to check for logic errors, you should ensure that the expected result occurs for a variety of inputs. Boundaries - explicit and implicit- are often a rich vein to be mined for defects. Try other kinds of interesting input as well, such as special characters, exceedingly long strings and improper;y-formatted data. Input that comes from other systems or users will often send strange or incorrect data. It's good to know what happens when your system receives it.

For complex output (e.g., generating a large web page from a template), it may not be feasible to check the output directly. However, you can check that there are valid properties of the output, and that those properties are expected. For example, you can check that the generated page data can be parsed and that it displays and shows data correctly.

### 2. Off-By-One Errors

Although technically a logic error, these are so common that they will be addressed separately. An off-by-one error is when a program does something wrong because a value is off by just one unit. This is the reason that there was a focus on determining boundary values in a previous chapter - boundary values are a focused way of looking for offby-one errors.

When testing, check the boundary values and you are likely to run across some off-by-one errors.

### 3. Rounding Errors and Floating Point Errors

Computer systems often use floating-point variables to represent decimal numbers such as 1.1. These are often much more efficient than using arbitrary-precision or rational values, but this efficiency comes with a cost—loss of precision. In order to check for rounding and floating point errors, try testing with different decimal values as input. Ensure that the final output does, in fact, match the expected output within the range of error. If the input data is going to interact with other data, check what happens when there is a large amount of data. These kinds of errors will often be compounded and thus easier to detect, when there are large amounts of data.

### 4. Integration Errors

When errors exist at the interface between two different parts of a system, this is known as an integration error. These interfaces can be class boundaries, package boundaries, or inter-process boundaries, all the way up to boundaries between large, multicomputer systems. Because interfaces are often where there are splits between teams or individuals working on different parts of a system, they are a target-rich environment for defects. Teams tend to communicate better with other members of a team; after all, they are working on similar pieces of the system and will often get rapid feedback whenever there is a problem when working on their particular subsystem.

As a tester, a focus on testing how systems integrate will pay great dividends. Ensuring that systems interoperate correctly if often difficult for developers to do, since they tend to be focused on the specific aspect of the software they are working on, as opposed to having a holistic view of the system.

### 5. Errors of Assumption

It is, for all intents and purposes, impossible to completely define most systems using requirements. Therefore, developers will often make assumptions about how the program is supposed to behave. However, these assumptions may not be in line with what the customer requires, or how other systems expect the system to act.

There also may be common requirements for a given domain, of which the software developers are not aware.

### 6. Missing Data Errors

Whenever data comes in from an external source to the program (e.g. from a CSV file, or an API endpoint, or from direct user input on the terminal), there exists the chance that necessary data will be missing. This may be as simple as a user accidentally hitting Enter when asked for input or as complex as a missing attribute somewhere deep within a large JSON response. In all cases, though, the system should deal with it appropriately. Always assume that anything external may or may not send you all of the data that you need.

### 7. Bad Data Errors

Even more problematic than missing data errors are bad data errors. While there is only one item to check for a given attribute when looking at Missing Data Errors, there are almost infinitely many possible ways for data to be “bad”. This data could be generated internally, but the most likely cause of bad data is data coming from an external system which has different assumptions, uses a different format, has been corrupted or modified in some way, etc.

- Data is too long
- Data is too short
- Data is formatted incorrectly
- Data is out of range
- Data has been corrupted
- Data is not consistent
- Data is unparseable

Tracking down bad data problems can be difficult, since there are so many ways that things can go wrong, and oftentimes only a very particular configuration of bad data will cause a problem. While it’s certainly possible to write test data that is problematic in different ways, a more efficient way is to use fuzz testing—sending in randomly generated data (which may or may not conform to the expected input in different ways) and ensuring that the system still operates correctly.

### 8. Display Errors

While a system may compute the correct value, it may be displayed incorrectly.

Whenever data is displayed, check not only that the value was computed properly, but also that is being displayed properly. By sending in data that contains odd characters, or extremely large or small values, or that is missing some normally-expected value, you can ensure that all the time spent determining the right value to display is actually seen by the user.

### 9. Injection Errors

A subset of Bad Data Errors, Injection Errors are when executable code or other instructions are passed in to a program. If a program can be tricked into executing these instructions, the consequences can be dire, including loss or corruption of data, unauthorized access to a system, or simply causing the system to crash. An especially common issue is not dealing with escapes or odd characters properly. An escape code which is not caught by the interface that the data is entered in may be used by another subsystem that does recognize it, or vice-versa. Characters may be used for different purposes by different subsystems or language.

### 10. Network Errors

Although computers are becoming more and more networked all the time, network connectivity is not yet ubiquitous or trouble-free. The system should continue to work even if network connectivity is temporarily lost. Some systems, of course, require network connectivity to work (running ssh or a web browser would be rather boring if you could not connect to any other systems), but they certainly should not crash or freeze without it.

### 11. Disk I/O Errors

Data inside your program lives in a nice, little prepared world. Data outside your program is vicious and uncontrolled, red in tooth and claw. If you’re reading a file off a disk, perhaps the file you are trying to read doesn’t exist. Perhaps it does exist, but it’s of the wrong format. Perhaps it’s of the right format, but it’s corrupted. Perhaps you’re trying to write to it, but it’s read-only. Perhaps another user has opened it in the meantime. Perhaps it’s in a directory to which your user does not have access. Perhaps you had access to that directory when the program started, but not now. Perhaps the file exists, but is empty. Perhaps the file is several hundred megabytes and you only expected it to be a few kilobytes. The list of things goes on and on.

You should be checking that if your system needs to access the disk, it is prepared for these eventualities. One possibility is to have a special testing subdirectory filled with all sorts of odd files, and whenever a new function would read a file, run it against these examples. These odd files would hit all of the variations mentioned above, as well as domain-specific oddities such as files whose internal structure was self-referential, or contained missing data, etc.

## 12. Interface Errors

Systems often need to communicate with other systems and they will need some sort of interface to do so. other systems, and they will need some sort of interface to do so. This interface may be more or less well-defined, from simply accepting text as input and providing text as output (such as with most Unix utilities such as more or grep) up to complex binary formats. However, this interface does need to be defined at some level, and there exists the possibility that the definition is specified ambiguously, or different parts of the definition contradict each other, or each side of the interface team had different assumptions when creating it (see Errors of Assumption, above). There also exists the possibility that it was just programmed incorrectly!
These interfaces do not have to be inter-process or inter-computer. They can be as low-level as an interface between two classes.

## 13. Null Pointer Errors

Any time that an object might be null, there needs to be an explicit check to ensure that its not before trying to access it.

## 14. Distributed System Errors

Testing a system which runs concurrently on multiple servers comes with its own set of issues. In many cases, there is not a "true" copy of data.Not only must you worry about testing it with different hardware and software setups, but also check different network topologies and different combinations of hardware and software setups. Different levels of bandwidth and latency may cause defects to manifest themselves. Times and timestamps may differ from one system to another, multiple people may be modifying the same data from different machines, different machines may have different concepts of the current state of the data, etc. There are numerous situations where determining what the expected behavior should be is difficult, if not altogether impossible.

When testing a distributed system, you should spend time checking that systems are synchronizing correctly; data should be coherent, at least eventually. Ensure that the system works whenever different aspects of the system change, and especially when individual systems break down (as they almost certainly will at some point—the more machines you have running your code, the more likely at least one will have a failure).

## 15. Configuration Errors

There are two different ways that configuration errors can manifest themselves. First, the administrators of a system can configure a software system in many different ways. For example, when setting up a Rails application, there are numerous configuration options in various YAML files that you can set. Many applications have configuration settings, command-line switches, or other ways of modifying how they operate, and they sometimes override or interact with each other in strange ways.

## 16. Accessibility Errors

Oftentimes, systems will work properly when used by a user using a standard configuration, but not when a user is using a non-standard input or output device. These are often necessary for users who cannot access a system using the standard keyboard mouse-monitor input/output setup; for example, blind users who use a braille terminal for reading output from their computer. If your software does not work correctly with these systems, then people who depend on them may have no other way to use your software.

