# Defects

## What is a Defect ?

A defect is any sort of an error in a program which causes the system under test to do one of the following.

1. Not meet the specified requirements (functional or non-functional)
2. Return an incorrect result
3. Stop execution unexpectedly (system stability is an implicit requirement in all systems under test)

The most obvious kind of defect is a system failing to meet requirements. If the requirements state the program should do something, and the program does not do it, then that is a defect.

The last kind of defect is one common to all programs - a program should not cease execution ('die') unexpectadetly. That is, if the intent of the user or the original writer or installer of the program is that the system should be running at some point in time, that program should be running at that point in time. If the system dies due to a segmentation fault, an untrapped division by zero, or dereferencing a null pointer, these are all considered defects. They should never happen in a program, even if the requirements do not specify that "the program shall run without any null pointer exceptions"

## The Defect Life Cycle

Upon discovering a defect, the tester (or whoever else finds the defect) should report it. Reporting may have different meanings depending on the organization and the severity of the defect. As its root, it meand that the specifics of the defect should be marked down in a location where it can be reviewed in the future, by stakeholders of the project - other testers, developers, management, etc.In most cases, teams will have some sort of defect-tracking software.

When testing software, it is important to keep trackmof as much information as is practical, for a variety of reasons. The first is that the more information is available, the more likely it will be that the defect is reproducible. Imagine that you have a system failing only when certain environment variables are set, but you don't specify that in the defect report. Without knowing about those environment variables, there's no way for the reproduction of the defect to take place. On the other hand, it's possible to take this too far. There is usually no need to mark down every process running on the system whenever a type is discovered.

When a defect is reported, its life is just beginning. Just as software development as a whole has a "software development life cycle" - going from requirements, to design etc, all the way to maintenance, support, and eventual "end-of-life"- ing of the software - defects also have a "defect life cycle". The defect life cycle is as follows:

- Discovery
- Reporting
- Triage/Assignment
- Fixing
- Verification

### Discovery

When a tester or other user first encounters and recognizes a defect, this is the "Discovery" stage.

### Reporting

The second stage is filing the defect, usually in some sort of standardized way. This involves spending some time and figuring out exactly what the tester did to expose the issue, what was expected to happen, and what was observed to happen. Remember that the role of the tester is to discover the issue and how to reproduce it,not to figure out the root cause of the problem in the code. A defect should be focused on what is wrong, not how to fix it.

### Triaging/Assignment

After a defect is filed, somebody must determine whether or not to spend resources to fix it, and if so, how to prioritize what may be a large number of defects. This is called **triaging**.The word “triage” comes from a medical term for prioritizing the order that patients should be treated based on how badly they’ve been wounded or how ill they are. There are far more defects known than the developers have time to fix. Relevant stakeholders decide which defects can be fixed given the amount of resources available and prioritize according to how quickly they can be fixed and how much pain they are causing to users of the software.

### Fixing

After the defect is assigned to a developer or a group of developers to work on, the developer fixes it. Oftentimes, an automated test will be added to cover the case where the defect occurred, so as to avoid it happening again in the future. As the developer is very close to the software being written, however, the final determination on whether or not a defect has been fixed is not up to them. A developer may not see that a different error was introduced by the fix, or that some edge cases were not covered. Mandatory code reviews can help ameliorate this somewhat, but usually a tester is used for the final verification that a defect has been fixed.

### Verification

After a defect has been fixed, the software should be returned to the test team to verify that it has been fixed. The developer or developers may not have tested all the different edge cases, or they may have caused other issues with their fix.fix. The tester can independently verify that the fix did indeed resolve the defect without causing other defects in the process.

## A standardized Defect Template

- Summary
- Description
- Reproduction steps
- Expected behavior
- Observed behavior
- Severity/Impact
- Workaround
- Notes

### Summary

The summary is a one sentence or so summary of the defect found. It's useful when people are scrolling through long lists of defects, or to make sure that people understand the gist of the defect.

### Description

In description, the defect is described in more detail. The goal is to allow an in-depth understanding of what the issue and why the behavior is in fact a defect. This is usually a few sentences long, although if the defect is more complicated or requires expository information to understand, it may be longer.

### Reproduction Steps

Remember that once you have found a defect, that somebody is probably going to try to fix it. The first step to fixing something is being able to reproduce it. The reproduction steps are the specific steps that one must take in order for the defect to manifest itself. This includes writing down any relevant steps and preconditions before the actual steps which directly caused the defect to occur.

### Expected Behavior

The core concept behind testing is checking that the expected behavior of a system matches the observed behavior. It makes little sense to test something if you don't know what should happen. In the expected behavior field, the tester should note what the system was expected to do after the execution steps are executed.

### Observed Behavior

Opposed to the expected behavior field is the observed behavior field. This describes what actually happened after the execution steps were executed. Just as in all of the fields of the defect report template, this should be filled as precisely as possible.

### Impact

The tester should have some idea of what impact this will have on the user base. In the **Impact field**, this can be specified. Keep in mind that, when possible, this should note what the impact is on the user base as a whole, not just a particular user.

### Severity

Related to the Impact field is the **Severity** field, which contains the defect reporter's initial impression of how sever the issue is. This can either be explained qualitatively or a standardized scale can be used in order to be more quantitative. The latter is far more popular.

An example rating system is explained below:

1. **Blocker** - This a defect so severe that the system cannot reasonably be released without either fixing it or devising a workaround.
2. **Critical** - Although the system could still be released with a defect of this magnitude, it severely impacts the core functionality of the program or makes it almost unusable.
3. **Major** - This is a defect which causes a relatively severe problem although not so sever as to entirely hobble a system. It has a good chance of being noticed by any user using the feature where the defect exists.
4. **Normal** - This is a defect which inconveniences the user, or a more severe defect with an easy and straightforward workaround
5. **Minor** - The defect might or might not be noticed, but does not cause much issue for the user, or has a simple and straightforward workaround.
6. **Trivial** - The defect would probably not even be noticed, unless someone is looking specifically for it. An example would be a small type.
7. **Enhancement** - Sometimes a defect isn't really a defect; it's some thing that the users want, but is not specified by the requirements or otherwise not in the scope of the current project. In such a case, the defect can be filed as an enhancement.

### Workaround

The workaround field describes how the defect can be avoided or at least ameliorated. It is important to note that workarounds are not always good workarounds; they may involve not using certain functionality.

### Notes

Think of this as the 'miscellaneous' field. It's where everything which might be useful for tracking down a defect, or that may or may not be relevant, goes.
