# Manual versus Automated Testing

With automated testing, you write the tests, using some sort of programming or scripting language or tool, which are then executed by the computer. These tests can check aspects of the program as specific as individual return values from methods all the way up to how an entire graphical interface should look on a screen.

## Benefits of Manual Testing

- It's simple and straightforward
- It's cheap
- It's easy to set up
- There is no additional software to learn, purchase, and/or write
- You are more likely to test things that users care about.
- Humans can catch issues that automated testing does not

## Drawbacks of Manual Testing

- It's boring
- It's often not repeatable
- Some tasks are difficult or impossible to test manually
- Human error is a possibility
- It is extremely time-and resource-intensive
- It limits you to black-box and grey-box testing

## Benefits to Automated Testing

- There is no chance of human error during test execution
- Test execution is extremely fast
- It is easy to execute, once the system is set up.
- It is easily repeatable
- It is simple to analyze the process
- It is less resource-intensive
- It is ideal for testing some aspects of the system which manual testing is bad at testing.
- It scales very well

## Drawbacks of Automated Testing

- It requires extra setup time-up front.
- It may not be able to catch some user-facing defects.
- It requires learning how to write automates tests, as well as additional tools and frameworks.
- It requires more skilled staff
- Automated tests only test what they are looking for.
- Tautological tests and other bad tests may creep in. Very large test suites can often accumulate cruft, since they may not be looked at by human eyes for long periods of time.   As long as the tests pass, they stay in the code; meanwhile, small modifications and fixes may creep into the codebase. Over time, this could result in some tautological test cases (that is, tests that will always pass because they are checking statements that are always true, such as 1 == 1). Or, some tests may become no longer necessary (e.g., checking parts of the program that are no longer used or are inaccessible to users). Without explicit work to ensure that the tests remain up to date, you may find that your computer is spending more time testing than is strictly necessary.
